 # Lesson 1 of the Fast.ai Course: A Journey into Practical Deep Learning
 
 Today I'll be sharing my insights and experiences from Lesson 1 
 of the Fast.ai course by Jeremy Howard. In this lesson, Jeremy takes us on a practical 
 and intuitive exploration of deep learning, using the Fast.ai library as our guide.

## Data Acquisition Process

Lesson 1 takes a top-down approach to explain image classification using convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which we will get to later. What I like most about this course is that you learn  by doing - which does seem academically strange not learning the math behind everything first, but I am up for getting stuck straight into it! Jeremy takes us through the process of building and training a model using the Fast.ai library for creating a bird recongiser.

Let's take a look at a code snippet and break down each step:

```
 searches = 'forest', 'bird'
 path = Path('bird_or_not')
 from time import sleep

 for o in searches:
     dest = (path/o)
     dest.mkdir(exist_ok=True, parents=True)
     download_images(dest, urls=search_images(f'{o} photo'))
     sleep(10)  # Pause between searches to avoid over-loading server
     download_images(dest, urls=search_images(f'{o} sun photo'))
     sleep(10)
     download_images(dest, urls=search_images(f'{o} shade photo'))
     sleep(10)

```

This code snippet showcases an essential part of the data acquisition process. Firstly, define the search terms, such as 'forest' and 'bird,' and set the path where our downloaded images will be stored. Using the `search_images()` and `download_images()` functions, we can then conduct multiple searches to gather a diverse collection of images related to what we want to search for. This method simplifies the process of obtaining labelled data, a crucial step in training our deep learning models.

## Simplifying Data Loading and Transformation

Next, we learnt about the powerful DataBlock API in Fast.ai, which simplifies the data loading. Let's explore another code snippet that showcases the DataBlock functionality:

```
dls = DataBlock(
    blocks=(ImageBlock, CategoryBlock),
    get_items=get_image_files,
    splitter=RandomSplitter(valid_pct=0.2, seed=42),
    get_y=parent_label,
    item_tfms=[Resize(192, method='squish')]
).dataloaders(path)

dls.show_batch(max_n=6)
```
The above code demonstrates how we can define a DataBlock to preprocess and load our data for training. By specifying the blocks as `ImageBlock` and `CategoryBlock`, we can then define the types of data we are working with. The get_items() function retrieves the file paths of our image data, and the splitter determines how the dataset will be split into training and validation sets. In this case, we are using `RandomSplitter` to assign 20% of the data to the validation set. The `seed=42` ensures reproducibility of the split. Once the DataBlock gets defined, we can then create the data loaders using the specified path to the dataset directory. 

Ultimately, the DataBlock functionality in Fast.ai provides a flexible and convenient way to preprocess and load data, making it much easier to prepare our datasets for training deep learning models.

## Model Training

Now we're ready to train our model! 

This super fast data acquisition search and loading the data, combined with using computer vision models such as `resnet18` allows model training to be quick and effective! Make sure to use a GPU (with hardware acceleration enabled on Google Colab) for extra speed. Jeremy introduces us to this technique, enabling us to leverage pre-trained models and adapt them to our specific tasks. Let's examine how transfer learning can be easily implemented using Fast.ai:

```
learn = vision_learner(dls, resnet18, metrics=error_rate)
learn.fine_tune(3)
```
In this case, the pretrained model was trained to recognise photos in imagenet. Click here -> [Fast.ai documentation for xresnet](https://docs.fast.ai/vision.models.xresnet.html) to learn all about the different model learners we can use! Each provides slightly different results, so it is fun to experiment with the others. As a beginner, I will mostly start with just using `resnet18` as it provides very fast and accurate results.

## Final thoughts and results
And there we have it! It is very simple in Fast.ai to retrive data, load it up, and train a model. Using this lesson 1 structure, I have been able to complete the first question of the ELEC4630 assignment, where I have classified 10 different animals! I wonder what else this simple structure can do.



